chore(#1385): Create design docs guidelines (#1391)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/contribute/code/design-docs.md

---
title: "Design Documents Guide"
linkTitle: "Design Docs"
weight: 12
description: >
  Guidelines for writing technical design documents
---

## What are design docs?

> Software development is not just about writing code, but rather about solving problems and building the right solutions. Before diving into an initiative or feature and start coding, it’s essential that the developers (and other team members) have a high-level understanding of what a solution might look like. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Software development is not just about writing code, but rather about solving problems and building the right solutions. Before diving into an initiative or feature and starting coding, it’s essential that the developers (and other team members) have a high-level understanding of what a solution might look like. 
```

> Design docs are informal documents that the leading developer of a certain piece of software create before they start the actual coding of a solution. The design doc contains high-level technical design decisions and alternatives that were considered when making those decisions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Design docs are informal documents that the leading developer of a certain piece of software creates before they start the actual coding of a solution. The design doc contains high-level technical design decisions and alternatives that were considered when making those decisions. 
```

## Why write design docs?

Besides being an excellent way of documenting software design, design docs come with several additional benefits:

> * Involve the team early and get feedback before the implementation, which is more costly.

Reviewer: It's not clear what is more costly...

```suggestion
* Involve the team early and get feedback before implementation, after which changes are more difficult.
```

* Identify solution concerns and issues rapidly, as making changes to a solution in the design phase is faster.
* Provide a fantastic way to document technical decisions, which benefits the team, the community, and future contributors.  
* Ensure the consideration of alternative solutions, assumptions and eventual constraints.
* Achieve consensus in the team around the design and get everyone on the same page.

## What could a design doc contain?

The design doc can be added to the GitHub issue related to the feature or initiative to be implemented or in a Google Doc. 

The list below contains a non-exhaustive list of items a design doc could cover.

> #### Context and scope

Reviewer: The paragraph only really talks about context and not scope. I would remove scope here and include it in the next section.

```suggestion
#### Context
```

An overview of the context in which the piece of software is being built and what is actually being built. It's important to keep this section succint as it's only meant to bring the readers up to speed with the background facts.

> #### Goals and non-goals
> A short list of what the goals of the piece of software are, and, very importantly, what the non-goals are. The non-goals aren’t negated goals such as "The app shouldn’t crash", but rather things that could be goals, but are explicitly chosen not to be goals, as for example "FHIR compliace of the API". Please note that a solution could cover a non-goal, as long as it doesn’t introduce trade-offs that prevent achieving the goals.

Reviewer: I prefer "out of scope" to "non-goals" and I think it makes the section easier to understand.

```suggestion
#### Goals and scope
A short list of what the goals of the piece of software are, and, very importantly, what is out of scope. The out of scope items are explicitly chosen not to be goals, as for example "FHIR compliace of the API". Please note that a solution could cover out of scope items, as long as it doesn’t introduce trade-offs that prevent achieving the goals.
```

#### Proposed solution
The details of the solution that was chosen for implementation. This flexible-format section can contain how the developer envisions to code the solution, diagrams, sample code, pseudo-code, security considerations, and references to similar solutions or frameworks to be used. It's important that this section explains why this particular solution best satisfies the goals.

#### Alternative solutions considered
A list of alternative designs that would have achieved similar outcomes, together with the trade-offs that each respective design makes and how those trade-offs led to the decision to select the proposed solution.

#### Assumptions

> A description of the assumptions made, as for example user interface design or general system characteristics (e.g. operating systems).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A description of the assumptions made, for example user interface design or general system characteristics (e.g. operating systems).
```

#### Constraints
These can include constraints such as security, scalability, or performance.

> #### Open Questions

Reviewer: Consistent case

```suggestion
#### Open questions
```
